Blog: How to Build Industrial Apps With FlowFuse Expert (#4995)
FlowFuse/website: src/blog/2026/05/flowfuse-expert-building-flows.md

---
title: "How to Build Industrial Apps With FlowFuse AI Expert"
subtitle: "From a description to a running flow"
description: "FlowFuse Expert now builds applications from a description. Here's what that looks like, what Expert understands about your environment, and how to keep iterating."
date: 2026-05-13
keywords: flowfuse ai expert, flowfuse expert, industrial automation, node-red, industrial dashboards, mqtt, opc ua, industrial iot, ai-assisted development, real-time monitoring, flowfuse cloud, machine monitoring
authors: ["sumit-shinde"]
image: /blog/2026/05/images/flowfuse-ai-expert-tile.png
video: DR9OTIVtBLU
tags:
    - flowfuse
cta:
    type: contact
    title: Try FlowFuse Expert on your team
    description: Available in soft launch on FlowFuse Cloud. Reach out to get it enabled.
---

> FlowFuse Expert now builds applications for you. Describe what you need, and the flow shows up on the canvas, wired and configured. Ask for a change, it updates on the spot.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
FlowFuse Expert now builds applications for you. Describe what you need, and the flow is built in front of you on the canvas, wired and configured. Ask for a change, it updates on the spot.
```

<!--more-->

We shared the initial announcement in the [2.30 release post](/blog/2026/05/flowfuse-release-2-30/#expert-application-building). This post walks through building your first flow with FlowFuse Expert and how Expert works alongside your environment.

![FlowFuse Expert building a simulated packaging conveyor monitoring application](./images/expert-application-building.gif)
_Expert building a packaging conveyor monitoring application: MQTT alerts, dashboard indicators, and real-time event simulation, from a single prompt._

## What FlowFuse Expert sees before it builds

Before the first node lands on the canvas, Expert reads your environment. We're tuning the experience to load context agentically based on what each scenario needs. Depending on the task, that can include:

- **Your canvas state**: the nodes you've placed, how they connect, what they do.

> - **Your available nodes**: which nodes are installed and at what version.

Reviewer: Name palette here

> - **Your infrastructure**: the databases, APIs, MQTT brokers, and services you've connected.

Reviewer: I think here we need to be clear that it reads your existing configurations based on existing nodes. We can additionally mention as a separate points that you can give required context to get hooked up to external infrastructure to the ff expert, something we are improving to be a more dedicated experience soon. Infrastructure native to FF will soon be automatically recognised and considered based on intent

> - **Your existing node configurations**: the settings already defined in the nodes on your canvas. You can also share context directly to connect Expert to external infrastructure — this is being improved into a more dedicated experience soon, and FlowFuse-native infrastructure will increasingly be recognised and considered automatically based on intent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Your existing node configurations**: the settings already defined in the nodes on your canvas. You can also share context directly to let the Expert create the node configurations for external infrastructure — this is being improved into a more dedicated experience soon, and FlowFuse-native infrastructure will increasingly be recognised and considered automatically based on intent.
```

- **Your runtime data**: when you attach it from the debug sidebar, Expert sees the `msg` data, errors, and values flowing through each node. It reasons about runtime behavior, not just wiring. We're working on optimising and automating this soon.

> The result is output you can trust to match what you expect, so you reach your intended outcome sooner. Expert builds *with* what you have, *around* what you've already created, and *on top of* your existing infrastructure.

Reviewer: Wondering if this we cannot just cut away. Seems a bit fluffy: Expert builds *with* what you have, *around* what you've already created, and *on top of* your existing infrastructure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The result is output you can trust to match what you expect, so you reach your intended outcome sooner.
```

> ## Try it in two minutes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Get started in two minutes
```

Optional

> Expert is currently in **soft launch** on FlowFuse Cloud while we refine the experience. Self Hosted Enterprise support is coming in the next release.

Reviewer: Mention public launch intended for next release

> During the soft launch, Expert must be manually enabled for your FlowFuse Cloud team. [Contact us](/contact-us/) using the email address associated with your team, and we’ll enable it for you. If you don’t already have a FlowFuse account, [sign up]({% include "sign-up-url.njk" %}) first.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During the soft launch, Expert must be manually enabled for your FlowFuse Cloud team. [Contact us](/contact-us/) using the email address associated with your team, and we’ll enable it for you. If you don’t already have a FlowFuse account, [sign up]({% include "sign-up-url.njk" %}) first. The soft launch is available for paid Flowfuse Cloud teams only.
```

Once enabled, open the editor and [find the FlowFuse Expert chat](/docs/user/expert/chat/#opening-the-chat-interface). The chat is our integrated AI across the whole suite, so you'll find it everywhere from FlowFuse to Node-RED Editor. 

Paste this in:

> *"Build a live dashboard with three machines (Machine 1, Machine 2, Machine 3). Each one should keep switching on its own every 2 seconds between Running (green), Idle (yellow), or Fault (red), so at any moment they can be in different states, with the name, state, and colored indicator updating live on the page."*

Reviewer: Wondering if this usecase is clear enough or aligns enough with an outcome that our target audience is interested in. Your call

Author: Yes, because it relates to machine monitoring, where users may want to fetch data from different sources and quickly view the status of each machine. It’s basically part of a machine overview dashboard, but this is just an example prompt they can try.

> You can watch Expert do its work as the flow builds itself on the canvas. A few seconds later it's wired up and ready. Hit Deploy, open the dashboard, and the cards start cycling through Running, Idle, and Fault.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can watch Expert do its work as the flow is built on the canvas. A few seconds later it's wired up and ready. Hit Deploy, open the dashboard, and the cards start cycling through Running, Idle, and Fault.
```

> *"Build a live dashboard with three machines (Machine 1, Machine 2, Machine 3). Each one should keep switching on its own every 2 seconds between Running (green), Idle (yellow), or Fault (red), so at any moment they can be in different states, with the name, state, and colored indicator updating live on the page."*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*"Build a live dashboard monitoring three machines (Machine 1, Machine 2, Machine 3). Each one should keep switching on its own every 2 seconds between Running (green), Idle (yellow), or Fault (red), so at any moment they can be in different states, with the name, state, and colored indicator updating live on the page."*
```

> You didn't go hunting through the palette or keep the documentation open in another tab. The flow just showed up.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You didn't go hunting through the palette or keep the documentation open in another tab. The flow just showed up saving you time and effort.
```

---
title: "How to Build Industrial Apps With FlowFuse AI Expert"
subtitle: "A practical guide to prompting, context, and iteration"
description: "FlowFuse Expert now builds applications from a description. Here's what it sees, how to prompt it well, and how to iterate without backtracking."
date: 2026-05-12
keywords: flowfuse ai expert, flowfuse expert, industrial automation, node-red, industrial dashboards, mqtt, opc ua, industrial iot, ai-assisted development, real-time monitoring, flowfuse cloud, machine monitoring
authors: ["sumit-shinde"]
image: /blog/2026/05/images/flowfuse-ai-expert-tile.png
video: DR9OTIVtBLU
tags:
    - flowfuse
cta:
    type: contact
    title: Try FlowFuse Expert on your team
    description: Available in soft launch on FlowFuse Cloud. Reach out to get it enabled.
---

FlowFuse Expert now builds applications for you. Describe what you need, and the flow shows up on the canvas, wired and configured. Ask for a change, it updates on the spot. 

<!--more-->

> We shared the initial announcement in the [2.30 release post](/blog/2026/05/flowfuse-release-2-30/#expert-application-building). This post covers building your first flow with FlowFuse Expert, how Expert understands your environment, and how to write clearer prompts to get better results.

Reviewer: I don't want to lean into the notion of having the user need to adjust to the system by writing better prompts. Instead the tech should learn how to better adapt to the user. Let's not set the precedent that the user needs to add onto themselves more knowledge how to deal with this new technology. The opposite is the idea. Less learning, better results.

![FlowFuse Expert building a simulated packaging conveyor monitoring application](./images/expert-application-building.gif)
_Expert building a packaging conveyor monitoring application — MQTT alerts, dashboard indicators, and real-time event simulation, from a single prompt._

## What FlowFuse Expert sees before it builds

Before the first node lands on the canvas, Expert reads your environment:

- **Your canvas state**: the nodes you've placed, how they connect, what they do.
- **Your available nodes**: which nodes are installed and at what version.
- **Your infrastructure**: the databases, APIs, MQTT brokers, and services you've connected.
- **Specific configurations**: MQTT topics, SQL queries, API endpoints, auth schemes, and UI settings.

> - **Your debug context**: when you attach it from the debug sidebar, Expert sees the `msg` data, errors, and values flowing through each node. It reasons about runtime behavior, not just wiring.

Reviewer: Most of these things are true but there is currently a discrepancy between what used to be the case and what is now the case since we enabled agentic building.

Before, we needed to opt-in/perform specific actions for certain context to become available. Now that is more automatic. I still need to have a discussion with the team as to where we land as of now due to all the changes.

I think for here we can state that we tuning the experience to load in context more agentically based on requirements per scenario. These can include the examples you mentioned. 

"Specific configurations" this one is not yet there. We are looking into this atm

> This means Expert doesn't suggest impossible things. It doesn't ignore your existing work or force you to rebuild. It builds *with* what you have, *around* what you've already created, and *on top of* your existing infrastructure.

Reviewer: Reframe this potentially to focus on trusted output according to expectations that is more helpful and gets you to your intended outcomes sooner.

## Try it in two minutes

> Before you start, make sure FlowFuse Expert is enabled for your team.

Reviewer: This is non actionable. I think we can skip this sentence.

> Expert is currently in **soft launch** on FlowFuse Cloud. We're starting with a small group so we can evaluate real-world usage before rolling it out more broadly.

Reviewer: Can you adjust this? we are soft launching as we are still refining the experience

> To enable it for your team, [contact us](/contact-us/). If you don't have a FlowFuse account yet, [sign up]({% include "sign-up-url.njk" %}) first.

Reviewer: We need to clarify that for the soft-launch this is a required step and that we need additional info like the email that is connected with your FlowFuse cloud team. See for how we communicate this in the release blogpost.

Reviewer: Note it is for FlowFuse cloud now only. Next release we are bringing this to SH enterprise

> Once enabled, open the editor, [find the FlowFuse Expert chat](/docs/user/expert/chat/#opening-the-chat-interface), and paste this:

Reviewer: Mention that the expert chat is our integrated AI across our entire suite and can be found everywhere, from FlowFuse to Node-RED.

> *"Build me an overview dashboard for three machines (Machine 1, Machine 2, Machine 3). Use an inject node set to repeat every 4 seconds to trigger a function node that randomly assigns each machine one of three states: Running, Idle, or Fault. Display each machine on a dashboard page as a ui-template card showing the machine name, current state, and a colored circle indicator: green for Running, yellow for Idle, red for Fault."*

Reviewer: I want to step away from the need to mention specific nodes, unless there is a good reason to. We need to focus on the outcomes the user wants, not the functional way to get there. This is the core problem we are trying to solve here for with the FlowFuse expert. We can be a bit ambitious with the prompt examples, as we are in soft-launch making it known that this is in heavy development.

> A few seconds later the flow is on the canvas, wired up. Hit Deploy, open the dashboard, and the cards start cycling through Running, Idle, and Fault.

Reviewer: Mentino that you can see the expert doing its work. For now the expert can only build things when you are in a Node-RED hosted instance on FlowFuse cloud. We are enabling this functionality wider soon from next releases onwards.

You didn't go hunting through the palette or keep the documentation open in another tab. The flow just showed up.

From there, you can replace simulated data with live machine data, redesign the dashboard, add alarms, connect MQTT or OPC UA sources, and keep refining the application through prompts instead of manual building.

<lite-youtube
  videoid=""
  style="width: 1024px; overflow: hidden; background-image: url('/blog/2026/05/images/flowfuse-expert-video-thumbnail.jpg'); background-size: cover; background-position: center;"
  title="Building Industrial Apps With FlowFuse Expert">
</lite-youtube>

> That prompt builds on the first try because it's specific. The next section is about why specificity matters, and what else changes the quality of what Expert produces.

Reviewer: This does not align with the intended way of the FlowFuse expert as described above

## How to prompt FlowFuse Expert well

> Expert builds what you describe. The clearer you are, the less you'll fix later.

Reviewer: outcomes, not outputs. The expert can get you thwere. Initially by describing outcomes. then outputs to fine tune. Also note that the user can still do thing manually side by side with the FlowFuse expert.

### Spell out what you want

Tell Expert exactly what you're after. Intervals, logic, colors, names. Anything you've already decided, put it in the prompt. The above example works on the first try because it doesn't leave anything to interpretation.

> If you just say *"build me a machine dashboard"*, Expert has to guess at all of it. And if you call them "the machines" instead of giving them names, the names won't line up between your nodes, your topics, and your dashboard a few prompts later.

Reviewer: True, but we need to think about how we want things to be. Context given above

### Show Expert the data when something's off

> If a card's blank or a value's wrong, don't ask Expert to figure it out from the wiring. Open the debug sidebar, [attach the context](/docs/user/expert/chat/#debug-context), and now Expert can see what's actually flowing through. The empty payload, the error, whatever. Guessing turns into reading.

Reviewer: This is wrong. The expert is not dependent on screens in Node-RED being open or not. The expert is able to self look this up. or you can the context speciically throug hthe methods that was already avialable prior

### One change per prompt

> Build it in pieces. Get the data flowing. Then bind the dashboard. Then add alerts. Check each piece before moving on.

Reviewer: Build it e2e, then refine it, get data flowing and bind it to the dashboard. Work iteratively, don't be afraid. you can inspect more in depth as needed for any piece.

> If you ask for four things in one prompt and something breaks, good luck figuring out which one. Slower in the moment, faster overall.

Reviewer: This is again an example of the user needing to adapt to the system rather than the other way around. I would reword to: in case you need to fix specific things its best to do it one by one for now, so you can verify each result.

### Read the flow before you deploy

> Before you hit Deploy, look at what Expert built. Open the function and read it. Glance at the topics. Make sure no random nodes ended up in there. A half-minute now is cheaper than catching it at runtime and prompting your way back.

Reviewer: Anti pattern here. I want users to click deploy fast, but taking their context into account. If this is connected to production processes, be careful. if not deploy away. Also, note that as time continues and we build out the FlowFuse expert further we can grant more and more confidence here.

### Start over when it gets messy

> Long chats get tangled. If Expert keeps making the same mistake or referencing stuff that's not on the canvas anymore, just start a new chat. Tell it what's there now, tell it what you want next. Way easier than digging out of a bad thread.

Reviewer: >If Expert keeps making the same mistake or referencing stuff that's not on the canvas anymore
too specific. make this about AI models getting poisoned with unrelated context over time., starting fresh often gives better results incase you are experiencing such downsides.

## Where to go next

> For the full reference on what FlowFuse Expert reads, how it interacts with your canvas, and advanced usage, see the [FlowFuse Expert documentation](/docs/user/expert/).

Reviewer: We might want to make updates here, as we have changed lots due to the agentic development that is now in soft-launch
